
  1.Experimental Setting/ Details: If you ran experiments, did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they were chosen)? The full details can be provided with the code, but the important details should be in the main paper, and information about how hyperparameters were selected should appear either in the paper or supplementary materials. Enter yes, no, n/a, or an explanation if appropriate. Answers are visible to reviewers.

    The full details can be provided with the code, in appendix or as a supplement, but the important details should be in the main paper.

    The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.

    The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.

    The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material.

    2. Experimental Result Reproducibility: If the contribution is a dataset or model, what steps did you take to make your results reproducible or verifiable? Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), release of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to your research. Enter yes, no, n/a, or an explanation if appropriate. Answers are visible to reviewers.

        While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, we do require all submissions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example...

        If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm.

        If the contribution is primailry a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture fully.

        If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset).

        We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.


    3. Experiment Statistical Significance: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments?

    The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.

    The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi338 dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper.

    The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions).

    The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)

    The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).

    It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean.

    It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified.

    For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates).

    If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.

    4. Experiments Compute Resource: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the computer resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments?

    The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.

    The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.

    The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper)
